>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
And I think many
people today don't
know what to believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>I felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
You know, as a boy, I was
fascinated by the classic,
"A Time Machine."
And then later on, of
course, "Back to the Future,"
the television show, Sliders.
We have been just
engulfed in our ability
to talk about time travel.
And on "Beyond Belief" we
talk with physicist Dr. Ronald
Mallet, of course, author
of the bestselling book,
"Time Traveler"
about time traveling.
Ron, welcome to "Beyond Belief."
>>RON MALLET: Oh, thank
you very much, George.
It's finally great to get a
chance to meet you in person.
>>NOORY: It really is.
You have just given us some
great programs on Coast
to Coast.
>>MALLET: Thank you.
>>NOORY: You let our
imaginations run wild
about all these
different possibilities.
>>MALLET: Well, thank you.
>>NOORY: I remember reading
stories about Albert Einstein
and his quest for time
travel and talking
about the speed of
light and all that.
How about you?
I mean, were you always
interested in time travel?
>>MALLET: Not always,
as a matter of fact.
The first 10 years of my life,
I didn't think about time travel
at all.
It had to do, in fact,
with a major disaster that
happened in my life.
And when I was 10
years old, my father he
was a radio and television
repairman in the Bronx
and he fought in
the Second World War
as a battlefield medic.
Thing is is that he looked
like a very healthy man.
He looked robust.
And for me, he
was like Superman.
He was brilliant
and he was handsome.
>>NOORY: Would go on forever.
>>MALLET: Right, exactly.
And the thing is is that
even though he worked hard,
he had a lot of time for us.
So the thing is we didn't
know he had a weak heart.
And he died of a
massive heart attack
when he was only 33 years old.
>>NOORY: Oh my god.
>>MALLET: And the thing is is
that it devastated my life.
I really went from being a
happy child to a depressed kid.
And I didn't care
whether I lived or died.
>>NOORY: Just like that.
>>MALLET: Right, exactly.
Thing is is that he left
me many, many gifts.
And among those was
a love of reading.
And after he died, about
a year after he died,
I came across a book
that changed my life.
Because it was called "The
Time Machine" by H.G. Wells.
It was actually a Classics
Illustrated version of it.
But on the very
first page of it,
it said that
scientific people know
very well that time is
just a kind of space
and we can move forward
and backward in time just
as we can in space.
And when I read that, it
was like balm to my soul.
I thought this is it.
If I can build a
time machine, then I
can go back to see my
father again and tell him
what was going to happen
and maybe change his life.
So that became my
mission in life.
That's when I really became
interested in time travel.
>>NOORY: Wow, you were obsessed
with time travel to go back--
>>MALLET: Exactly.
>>NOORY: --talk to your
father and say, dad, you
got to be healthy.
You've got to do this,
you got to do that.
>>MALLET: Exactly.
And the thing is is that
it was a secret mission.
I should say that even
in at 11 years old,
I was astute enough to realize
that people were already
worried about me
and if I told them
I wanted to build a time
machine, that might not
get the right response.
So I kept it as a secret quest.
But that was the beginning.
Now you mentioned Einstein.
In fact, that was the thing.
I knew this was science fiction.
And I had this fantasy
that it could be done.
And as a child, I
even tried to use
the model that was on the
cover of the magazine.
And I tried to put
things together
with my father's old television.
>>NOORY: His tubes and stuff.
>>MALLET: --and
everything like that.
And, of course,
nothing happened.
But it did say that scientific
people know very well.
So I knew it had something
to do with science.
And a couple of years after
that when I was about 12 or 13,
I came across, you might
say, the second book
that changed my life.
And the second person.
And this was a book called "the
Universe and Dr. Einstein."
I picked it up in a
Salvation Army store.
I should mention that
after my father died,
we plunged into poverty.
>>NOORY: Of course.
Income stream was gone.
>>MALLET: Exactly.
But I had this book
habit that I had to feed.
And I picked it up
for about a nickel.
And the thing is it had a
picture of Einstein next
to an hour class.
So I knew it must
say that Einstein
had something to do with time.
And even though I
couldn't understand all
of the articulations
in the book,
I did pick up the fact that
Einstein said that unlike
in classical physics,
the physics of Newton,
in Newton's physics, which
everyone is familiar with,
time cannot be altered.
Time cannot be changed.
Space cannot be changed.
Einstein's revolution was to
say that space and time can
be altered.
So I knew if I could understand
how that could happen, then
that would be the key for me
to building a time machine.
So Einstein became
my second obsession.
>>NOORY: That was
the opening for you?
>>MALLET: That was
the opening for me.
Because I knew that that
would provide the science
that would be needed for this.
And it was a long
journey after that,
but that was the beginning.
>>NOORY: As you evolved, Ron,
and as you went to school
and got your degrees and then
became a Ph.D. physicist,
this quest for time travel,
was it always in there?
Always there?
>>MALLET: It was
always in there,
but I still as I went
along, once again,
I was afraid to tell
people about it.
As I said, we were poor,
so after high school
I wasn't able to go
right to college.
So I went into the services,
it was during the Vietnam War
period, and I used the GI Bill
afterwards to go to college.
>>NOORY: Beautiful.
>>MALLET: And so that's
how I was able to go on.
>>NOORY: And that's
what it's there for.
>>MALLET: Right.
>>NOORY: It really is.
Well, that's fascinating.
And I'm sure, Ron, you
didn't tell your professors,
I want to get a
degree in physics
because I want to
develop a time machine.
>>MALLET: You're
absolutely right, George,
I knew that that
would not be something
that would be good
for my career path.
The thing is is that
Einstein, however, his work
led to one of the most
interesting objects
in the universe which
is a black hole.
And so I knew, and it turns out
that black holes affect time,
so I knew if I
studied black holes,
then that would be something
that would be-- in fact,
physicists consider black
holes as being crazy.
OK?
But they're legitimate crazy.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>MALLET: Whereas time travel
was considered was crazy crazy.
So if I studied black holes and
used that as my cover story,
then I felt I was safe.
And so that's what I did.
I built my career on
studying black holes.
>>NOORY: Well, you
know, there's so much
going on in this universe.
Or should we say
the multiverses now.
And, you know,
we're still trying
to figure out the
Big Bang theory.
We're still trying to figure
out so many different facets
of life.
Why are we here?
How did we get here?
I guess by adding the ingredient
in of time travel, that's just
as possible as all these other
things that are out there.
>>MALLET: Yeah, well,
as a matter of fact,
it's even more possible
because we actually
have Einstein's
theories which allow
us to see the real
possibilities of time travel.
I mean one of the things
that Einstein developed,
two major theories.
One was called the special
theory of relativity
and the other is the general
theory of relativity.
And the special theory of
relativity, in a nutshell,
it has to do with
light and time.
And what Einstein said was
that because the speed of light
cannot be changed no matter
how fast you move towards it
or away from it, other objects,
you can't change the speed
by going towards it or away from
it, but with light it doesn't.
And Einstein said the only
way that that can happen
is if time slows down
the faster you move.
Now you might say,
has this been shown?
As a matter of fact, not
only has it been shown,
but it's been shown
many, many times.
Both on the macroscopic level
and the microscopic level.
There was a very
important experiment
that was done back in 1971
at the Naval Observatory.
And what this
experiment involved
was having two atomic
clocks, which as you know,
are the most precise time
keeping mechanisms we have.
They put one of the clocks on
board an ordinary passenger
jet.
They kept the other clock at
rest at Naval Observatory.
They flew the passenger jet
around the world at close
to the speed of sound.
When they bought
it back, they found
that the clock on the passenger
jet had actually slowed down.
>>NOORY: And it
shouldn't have, right?
>>MALLET: According to
standard old theory of Newton,
it shouldn't have.
But according to
Einstein's theory--
>>NOORY: It should have.
>>MALLET: It should have.
So it proved that
Einstein was right.
Now remember, when I'm talking
about time, and a clock,
I'm not talking about just
simply a mechanical mechanism.
Your heart rate, your
metabolism, they're clocks.
This means that the
faster you move,
the more your heart
rate slows down.
OK?
So you don't age the same way.
That means that
those physicists--
>>NOORY: Everything slows down.
>>MALLET: --everything
slows down, exactly.
So that's where time
travel comes in.
Because the thing
is is that, in fact,
this is the way you
see it in a movie.
Someone gets into a device,
a fast moving rocket
or something like that.
Time slows down for them.
They don't notice it, but
everyone else sees them--
>>NOORY: It's changed.
>>MALLET: --change.
Right.
And when they come back, they
may only be a few years older,
whereas, decades or
centuries may have passed.
>>NOORY: You may not even
have a planet to come back to.
>>MALLET: Well, in fact,
or an altered planet.
As a matter of fact,
one of the movies
that got it right was "Planet
of the Apes" because of the fact
that what they did
was they didn't
realize they had gone through
space so fast that they
had arrived at earth
at a different period.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>MALLET: And that's
what happened in it.
So that shows that real
time travel can happen.
I should mention that the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN, which
they use to accelerate
subatomic particles, many
of the subatomic
particles can only
live for a millionth
of a second and they
completely disintegrate.
But now, according to
Einstein, the faster
these subatomic particles move.
the more their clock
would slow down.
So they would live longer.
And every time they
turn that machine on,
they're able to get subatomic
particles living 20 to 30
times longer than
they normally would.
If that happened
for human beings,
if we could-- and
remember, I mentioned
that this effect
depends on speed.
And if we would
see it drastically.
Now in the experiment I was
talking about at the Naval
Observatory, it was only
by fractions of a second.
Because they were traveling
at the speed of sound.
Now, you might say that's pretty
fast, but compared to light,
it's slow.
I mean, to give you an
example, the speed of sound
is about 720 miles per hour,
whereas the speed of light
is 186,000 miles per second.
>>NOORY: Per second.
Big difference.
>>MALLET: Exactly.
And to put that
into perspective,
we use mach numbers to talk
about the speed of sound.
So mach 1 is one times
the speed of sound.
Mach 2 is two times.
Mach 3 is-- OK, we
have passenger jets
that can do mach 1.
We have fighter jets
that can do mach 2.
We even have stealth
fighters that can do mach 3.
Three times the speed of sound.
Let's put the speed of
light into mach numbers.
It turns out that light
travels at mach one million.
That means--
>>NOORY: Wow.
Look at the difference.
>>MALLET: You
know, so that means
that as far as
sound is concerned,
it's standing still compared
to the speed of light.
When we have rockets that can
go close to the speed of light,
we'll see the sort of thing
that we see in the accelerators.
That is to say that a person
traveling out in space going
close to the speed of
light, when they come back,
maybe only a few years
have passed for them.
But because their metabolism
and heart rate have slowed down,
decades could pass.
And if they have a
family, that could--
>>NOORY: Oh my god.
>>MALLET: --have
the strange effect
of coming back and
finding out they're
younger than their
children or grandchildren.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
Their little boy may be an
adult with his own kids.
>>MALLET: That's right.
>>NOORY: I'm not sure
I'd want to do that.
Now that's talking about
going into the future.
>>MALLET: That's
right, that's right.
>>NOORY: You want to
go back into the past.
>>MALLET: That's right.
>>NOORY: How's that possible?
>>MALLET: OK.
Very good point, George.
The thing is is
that with respect
to the special
theory of relativity,
it's only a one-way journey.
You can only go forward.
And there's no speed
that you can use even up
to the speed of light that will
take you back into the past.
The speed of light is
the ultimate speed limit
for the universe.
It turns out,
however, that Einstein
developed a second theory.
And this was called his
general theory of relativity,
and it was developed
10 years afterwards.
The reason why he developed this
theory was because of the fact
that he wanted to apply
this principle of relativity
to all the forces of nature.
OK?
And all of them abated
except for gravity.
That is to say that
according to Newton,
gravity travels instantaneously.
It travels even faster
than the speed of light.
And that led to a weird paradox,
because what it would imply
is a simple example.
Let's suppose that we think
about the sun and the earth.
OK?
The earth is
orbiting from the sun
about 93 million miles away.
OK?
>>NOORY: Taking a
year to go through it.
>>MALLET: Right, exactly.
OK.
Now what would happen if a
cosmic catastrophe occurred
and destroyed the sun?
What will we see?
Now it's important to note
when I say, what will we see,
it takes since we're 93 million
miles away from the sun,
it takes eight minutes for
light to get from the sun
to the earth.
>>NOORY: We wouldn't
know for eight minutes.
>>MALLET: Exactly, exactly.
You know it's also strange
to think that we never
see the sun the
way that it is now.
We only see the sun,
throughout our whole life,
the way that it was
eight minutes ago.
>>NOORY: Eight minutes ago.
>>MALLET: But
according to Newton,
as soon as the
sun was destroyed,
gravity would shut
down immediately.
So we would have this weird
effect of still seeing
the sun in the sky,
but, due to the fact
that gravity's
shut down, we would
be hurtling off into space.
Einstein said that can't
happen, that gravity
could travel faster
than the speed of light.
So he developed a second theory
called the general theory
of relativity,
which is essentially
his theory of gravity.
>>NOORY: And he did
this without a computer.
>>MALLET: That's right.
He did it without a computer.
And then I should mention
without grant money.
He was a theoretical
physicists and his laboratory
was all in his head.
But what he did was to
develop a whole new way
of looking at gravity which says
gravity is not really a force.
Gravity is actually
a property of space.
A simple way that I
like to tell people
that you can visualize
that is think of space
as being like a rubber sheet.
Like a little trampoline,
if you can imagine that.
OK?
And imagine that you put a
bowling ball on that rubber
sheet.
>>NOORY: So it kind of
pulls in a little, right?
>>MALLET: Right, exactly.
Now the thing is, suppose you
put a marble on that rubber
sheet.
What's going to happen?
>>NOORY: It'll
all roll right in.
>>MALLET: You got it.
Now suppose the
rubber sheet's there,
but you make it transparent.
So it's there,
but all you see is
the bowling ball and the marble.
So when you put
the marble there,
the marble starts moving
towards the bowling ball.
You would say, oh, somehow the
bowling ball is pulling them.
But you know that's not
what's really happening.
That, in fact, the
bowling ball is just
curving the rubber sheet.
Well, that's what Einstein
said the sun is doing.
The sun is actually
curving empty space.
We can't see it, OK?
But it's curving empty space
in exactly that same way.
And the earth is
like that marble.
OK?
Fortunately for us, when the
solar system was created,
the earth had a little
bit of a sideways motion.
If it had just simply
been placed there,
the Earth would move
towards the sun.
Just like the marble.
And in fact, if you go back
to the analogy with the rubber
sheet and the bowling ball,
if you take the marble
and you give the marble a
little bit of a sideways motion,
it will actually go around.
Just like it'll orbit it.
And it's like a skater
on a roller derby rink.
So for Einstein,
gravity is not a force.
It's actually a
property of space.
But what this means, however,
is that it solved the problem.
Because let's go back
to the bowling ball.
If I take the bowling
ball off the rubber sheet,
what's going to happen?
>>NOORY: The sheet
should go back up, right?
>>MALLET: Right, exactly.
And that's going to
take time for the effect
to go out to the marble.
OK?
Well, if the sun
were destroyed, space
would be elastic
in that same way.
The vibration of space,
which we now remember
is a vibration of
gravity, if you calculate
that, it takes eight
minutes for that vibration
to get out to the earth, OK?
So if it's any consolation, if
we-- if our sun were destroyed,
it would take eight
minutes not only
for us to see the light
go out, but for us
to hurl off into space.
So that was Einstein's
major contribution.
Now it turns out that the
bending of space and time
is the key to what
I was interested in.
Because it turns out
that not only can you use
gravity to affect space, but
you can affect time in a way
that you could actually
twist time into a loop.
And this would allow
you the possibility
of going back into the past.
>>NOORY: Would you build a
machine to be able to do this?
>>MALLET: As a matter of
fact, the work that I do,
and I should mention
again that I'm
a theoretical physicist
like Einstein.
And physics, unlike the
other areas of science,
has a very precise
division of labor
between theoretical and
experimental physics.
Theoretical physicists
use equations
and build mathematical models to
try to understand the universe.
Experimental physicists
actually build the equipment
to see if the universe does--
>>NOORY: See if it works.
>>MALLET: Right, exactly.
And what I developed
was a mathematical model
based on Einstein's
theories in which I
was able to show that
space and time can
be altered by using light.
OK?
Now it's interesting
because in Newton's theory,
light cannot affect matter
with a gravitational force.
The only thing that can affect--
matter can affect matter.
Like the Earth can pull us down
and the sun keeps us in orbit.
But in Einstein's theory,
light can also create gravity.
Now the thing is is
that it turns out,
and I should mention that
gravity can affect time.
This is something
that I didn't mention.
I should mention because
in special relativity,
speed is what affects time.
In Einstein's general
theory of relativity,
it's actually gravity
that can affect time
and what Einstein showed was
that the stronger gravity is,
the more time will slow down.
So for example, a clock here
at the surface of the earth
will actually run slower than
a clock at a higher altitude
according to Einstein.
>>NOORY: Because of gravity.
>>MALLET: Because of gravity.
Now you might say, has this been
something that's demonstrated?
Not only has it
been demonstrated,
it's actually something that's
part of our ordinary life.
Most people don't realize
this, but the GPS system
works because of
Einstein's theory.
Turns out that right now,
12,000 miles above us,
there are 24 satellites
that are in orbit.
Three satellites cover
a particular portion
of the earth, OK?
Now the way in which
the GPS system works
is the fact that
there are clocks
on board those satellites and
there's a clock in your unit.
OK?
The satellite sends a
signal at a certain time
which reaches your
unit at a certain time.
Now in physics, it's a
very simple relationship
between distance,
speed, and time.
If you know any two of these,
you can determine the other.
So if you know the time, in this
case, the time that the signal
was sent by the
satellite and the time
that it reaches your unit, OK?
And you know the speed,
which is the speed of light,
you can compute distance.
That's how the GPS system works.
However, when they
first set it up,
it was giving incorrect
locations all over the place.
And what they had
forgotten was they
hadn't taken into
account initially
Einstein's theory of gravity.
Because it turns out that the
unit, the clock in your unit,
in your car--
>>NOORY: It seems like it would
have been simple to figure out,
right?
>>MALLET: Right, well,
but that's the thing.
In Newton's theory, time
can't be affected by gravity.
And so when the engineers
were setting it up--
>>NOORY: They went by Newton.
>>MALLET: They went
by-- you got it.
They went by Newton.
So the--
>>NOORY: I did well in
physics, by the way.
>>MALLET: In fact,
it's very clear
that you did, as
a matter of fact.
But they went by
Newton which said
that time isn't
affected by gravity.
And the thing is
is that it wasn't
until when they were
consulting with the physicists
that the physicists
said, well, you know,
you have to use
Einstein's theory
because time is
affected by gravity.
So the time in your car is not
the same as the time on board
those satellites.
So they actually
have to use computers
to calibrate the
system to make sure
that they're staying in sync.
>>NOORY: So do
you think 10 years
from now, 20 years from now, 100
years from now we are literally
going to be able to go into
the future or into the past?
>>MALLET: Oh, yes.
I mean going into the future
is already, as I said,
a possibility.
But going into the
past, yes, because it's
based on real physics.
I mean the thing is is that
in Einstein's general theory
of relativity that's
a possibility.
Now I'll show you why
going into the past--
>>NOORY: We could go
back and see Jesus,
we can go back and
see your father.
>>MALLET: Well--
>>NOORY: Can we
capture events that--
>>MALLET: That's going
to be a possibility,
but not in a simple way.
In fact, it's going to be
something that might involve,
even though it sounds
science fiction, going back
in our distant past might
involve extraterrestrial.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>MALLET: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But I'll come to that.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>MALLET: But the thing
is is that because there's
a limitation to what it is that
you can do in traveling back
into the past, the thing
is is that remember
that I said that in Newton's
theory, the only thing that
can affect gravity, can
create gravity, is matter.
In Einstein's theory, not only
can matter create gravity,
but light can
create gravity, too.
And that's actually where
my breakthrough came in.
And I think you can actually
see the logic in it.
Gravity can affect time.
>>NOORY: In a big way.
>>MALLET: Right.
Light can create gravity.
Therefore, light
can affect time.
Exactly.
That was my
breakthrough to realize
that you could use light
to manipulate time.
To control time.
The thing is is that in
a special type of light,
laser light, what I was able to
show in the mathematical model
was that by using the
circulating beam of laser
light, and there's a device that
can create a circulating light,
it's called a ring laser.
But actually you can
create it by simply--
>>NOORY: Just going around.
>>MALLET: Right, it's
just getting light
to go around and around.
And there's a number
of different ways
that you can do that, but
the thing is, however,
that causes an effect
on empty space.
That actually causes-- the
circulating light actually
causes a twisting of space.
Remember, in Einstein's theory,
space acts like a medium.
>>NOORY: And you
built one of these?
>>MALLET: Well, mathematically.
The thing is, but let me
demonstrate to you exactly--
>>NOORY: All right, sure.
>>MALLET: --how this, by
analogy, how this would work.
Now think of the coffee in this
cup as being like empty space.
OK?
And think of the spoon as being
like the circulating light
beam.
Now what happens to
the coffee as I stir?
The coffee starts
to swirl around.
That's what the
circulating light
beam is doing to empty space.
But now you might say,
well, wait a minute.
If it's empty space, how am
I going to see this effect?
Well, in the case of
the coffee, suppose
that I have something
like a simple wood chip.
>>NOORY: And you
drop it in there.
>>MALLET: And I
If I take this and
I stir the coffee,
look what happens
to the wood chip.
OK?
>>NOORY: It's swirling around.
>>MALLET: Right and the
coffee is causing that to--
>>NOORY: Still spinning.
>>MALLET: Right, exactly.
Now the thing that would play
the role in the real experiment
of the wood chip would
be a subatomic particle
that's a part of every
atom, the neutron.
>>NOORY: Can CERN do that?
>>MALLET: It's interesting.
They could if they wanted to set
up that kind of an experiment.
But the type of experiment,
I mean one of the places
in this country that
would actually do it
is the National Institutes
of Standards and Technology
in Gaithersburg, Maryland.
They actually have a
neutron facility there.
In fact, I visited
there back in January
with one of my Ph.D.
graduate students
to look at their
neutron facility
and to talk with them about the
possibility of actually doing
this type of experiment.
>>NOORY: That would
be a great experiment.
>>MALLET: Exactly.
So the thing would be
to use these neutrons
and to have a circulating
beam of light twisting space
and then, if you put
the neutron in there,
you would actually see the
neu-- even though you couldn't
see the space, the space would
be dragging the neutron around.
So you knew that the empty space
was actually doing something.
And so they were
interested in learning more
about what it is that
we're trying to do.
So we're going to be looking
at the possibility of perhaps
collaborating with them to
see this particular effect.
Now what's important
here is the fact
that in Einstein's
theory, space and time
are connected to each other.
Whatever it is you do to
space also happens to time.
>>NOORY: Simultaneously.
>>MALLET: Now that's critical.
Right, well, the thing
is is that I should
say that it happens,
but it happens
if you twist space
strongly enough.
In other words, at
low swirls, you only
get the twist in the space.
But if you twist space--
>>NOORY: Fast enough.
>>MALLET: Fast enough.
Or I should say strongly enough.
If you twist space
strongly enough,
the following thing will happen.
Let's suppose that I
represent a timeline
on this sheet of paper.
So what I'm going
to draw is a line
that represents our
lifeline, if you will.
And this lifeline is a timeline.
At the bottom of this line,
I'm going to put the past.
>>NOORY: OK
>>MALLET: At the
middle of this line,
I'm going to put the present.
And at the top of this line,
I'm going to put the future.
OK.
Now even though we're not
consciously aware of us,
all of us throughout
our life are
moving from the past whatever
it was you were doing yesterday
to the present,
here, to the future.
This is what we are all doing.
OK?
But now, and this is the
really interesting thing,
if you twist space
strongly enough,
then what's going
to eventually happen
is that the straight
line of time
is going to be
twisted into a loop.
Now look what this implies.
You start out at the past,
you move along the timeline
to the present, you
continue along the timeline
to the future, but I've
made time into a loop.
>>NOORY: It keeps going.
>>MALLET: I can go from the
future, back to the past.
So by twisting space, I
can twist time into a loop
and by doing that, it allows
me to time travel to the past.
That was my--
>>NOORY: Some civilization that
might be a million years ahead
of us, they have got to
have perfected this by now.
>>MALLET: I agree with you.
And, in fact, this is
where the point-- because
remember what I said.
That when you turn a
device on, OK, that's
when space and time
starts getting twisted.
So if I turned it on
today and I left it on,
let's say, for 10 years, then
someone could send information
back or travel back seven years,
five years, all the way back
to the point that the
device was turned on.
But they can't go earlier
than that because of the fact
that there was no device
earlier than that.
That means that--
and it doesn't matter
what particular
mechanism that you use,
I mean I'm using light.
That was my major breakthrough.
But any other way in
which you would do it,
it would be the device
that's causing the effect.
That means that since
we haven't develop it.
And, in fact, this
answers the question
that sometimes people ask,
well, if time travel to the past
is possible, how come we
don't have time travel
tours all over the place?
What that just simply says is
that the first human scale time
machine hasn't been invented.
>>NOORY: Hasn't been invented.
>>MALLET: Exactly, in fact--
>>NOORY: Ron, I
want to thank you
for being on "Beyond Belief."
Many more shows
with you, my friend.
Dr. Ron Mallet, "Time
Traveler," as we
talk about time traveling.
Right here on "Beyond Belief."
>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC]